Not a hair of your head will perish when they kill you.
You get a hold of that truth and you will become one free and radical, counter-cultural citizen of heaven in the Disneyland called America.
It's extremely hard to wrap your mind around a promise like the one Jesus gave here.
They might kill you, but not a hair on your head will perish.
That's not denial we're talking about here.
It's actually defiance, and it's rooted in something deeper.
I'm Dan Kruver.
In this episode of Light and Truth, John Piper shows us how that kind of confidence sets us free to live for Christ no matter the cost.
This message was originally delivered in Wheaton, Illinois at the Act III Reformation Conference on October 28, 1999.
in a day in which relativism is the air we breathe and selfism and subjectivism guards relativism by saying what I want or maybe we should say relativism preserves selfism by saying that's the philosophy that lets me choose what I want and we it's just interesting this is so interesting in relation to something Tom closed with you said something so penetrating I just want to say it again so that we get it
He said that it is a humble thing to submit to an objective word outside yourself and to preach instead of creating out of your own head ideas.
Now that's exactly the opposite of what contemporary views of humility and pride are today.
Say what you want to say, Tom.
And you'll be humble, but tell me that I should believe what you say and you're arrogant.
Everybody saying what they want to say is a humble state of affairs.
Anybody telling anybody else to believe what they ought to believe is arrogant.
That is a total redefinition of humility and pride from what it is in the Bible and what it is in reality.
which led me a few weeks ago to write this little article for my church news thing that goes out each week.
What is humility?
And I quoted Chesterton who got it so right, but I want to make sure that we get this because you are going to be accused of arrogance if you preach.
You're simply going to be accused of arrogance if you preach.
Anybody that stands up and says, thus, that the Lord will be scoffed at, sneered at, considered, greeter.
What then is humility?
It just gives you five brief statements of what humility is.
Number one, humility begins with a sense of subordination to God in Christ.
A disciple is not above his teacher.
So we go under the Bible, we go under Christ, we go under God.
And we don't presume to say, as our own ideas, we go under.
And if somebody can prove us wrong, we will submit to the authority.
That's the beginning of humility.
Secondly, humility does not feel a right to any better treatment than Jesus got.
So when you are persecuted, you don't huff and puff and say, you have no right to treat me that way.
George Otis said, God never called his people to a fair fight.
If you insist on the fight being fair, you'll never preach the gospel.
You'll ruin the gospel by your insistence on your own rights.
You don't have any rights under God.
You're a servant.
You're a slave.
You go where he tells you to go.
You say what he tells you to say.
And you take your lumps like it says in 1 Peter 2, if we endure suffering for doing wrong, what credit is that?
But if when you do right, you suffer for it, it is a grace from God.
That's exactly the opposite of the way the world thinks.
The only suffering that you should have is undeserved suffering.
And when it comes, you don't have any right to be treated any better than Jesus.
And you just accept it, that's your lot.
through many tribulations, we must enter the kingdom of heaven.
Thirdly, humility asserts truth not to bolster the ego or get control, but as a service to Christ and love to the adversary.
I will look any Jewish person in the face who's calling me arrogant and say, what you call arrogance in my directing you to Jesus Christ as your Messiah and your Savior.
I call love.
Fourth, humility knows it is dependent on grace for all knowing and believing.
And fifth, humility knows it is fallible.
Yes, the world likes that one.
And so considers criticism and learns from it, considers and listens to all criticism and learns from it, but also knows
that God has made provision for human conviction and that He calls us to persuade others with it.
Now I call you to courage in the face of this kind of culture and this biblical warning.
Preach the truth boldly.
Take stands in newspapers.
Take stands at rallies.
Go to jail for the unborn.
Take some radical steps to put truth before the people.
Do something weird and crazy.
Take a sabbatical and go to Saudi Arabia or something.
Well, I've got 15 minutes to exposit my text, which is Matthew 10, verses 24 to 31.
And that's all I need is 15 minutes.
I want you to read this with me, and I want to give you five incentives to be courageous that Jesus gave to me about nine years ago.
Let me read this text.
This is Matthew 10, 24 to 31.
A disciple is not above his teacher nor a servant above his master.
It is enough for the disciple to be like his teacher and the servant to be like his master.
If they have called the master of the house, be eligible.
How much more will they malign those who are of his own household?
So, have no fear of him.
For nothing is covered that will not be revealed, or hidden that will not be known.
What I tell you in the dark, utter in the light, and what you hear whispered proclaim upon the housetops, and do not fear those who kill the body, but cannot kill the soul, rather fear him who can destroy both soul and body in hell.
Are not too spare a soul for a penny?
Now one of them will fall from the ground without your father's will,
But even the hairs of your head are all numbered.
Fear not, therefore, you're of more value than many sparrows.
Now there's no doubt what the main point of this text is, right?
Three times, he says it, verse 26, so have no fear of them.
Verse 28, do not fear those who kill the body.
Verse 31, fear not, therefore, you are of much more value than many sparrows.
Fear not is the main point of this text.
Three times he gives the imperative.
Don't fear, don't fear, don't fear, which is translated into my sermon.
Be courageous, be courageous, be courageous.
Get fear out of your life of men.
Don't fear men.
Don't be what I and Rand called a second-hander.
I and Rand was an atheistic
philosopher novelist who wrote Atlas Shrugged and the Fountainhead and the virtue of selfishness and a whole bunch of other books that I got utterly swept away with about 20 years ago and she's dead now and I assume she's in hell because she hated Christianity with a passion unless she converted at the end and she
thought Christianity was a bunch of baloney because it just had to do with altruism, not courageous standing up for your own convictions, but just laying down dead like Jesus on the cross and sacrificing your highest convictions.
And she talked about being
A second-hander, she despised it and so do I.
A second-hander is a person who is so weak in what they believe and in their own sense of standing in grace that they're always looking over their shoulder at what others are going to say about what they wear or say.
or comb their hair, or do their makeup, or clean their house, or drive the car.
What are others saying about me?
That's a weak, sniveling, low, despicable way for a human being created in the image of God and redeemed by the blood of Jesus and destined for glory to live.
Who cares what anybody says?
You speak the truth
You give it account to the king, and you let the chips fall where they will.
That's what this text is calling you to do.
Now, what are the motives here?
What are the motives to speak the truth, like it says in verse 27.
I'll tell you, speak in the light.
What I show you in the dark, say up on the housetops what you hear whispered.
So the point is speaking the truth openly, even when it's controversial, and there are five incentives here, and if you get a hold of them, you will be one courageous person, or if they get a hold of you.
Number one, notice the therefore in verse 26, or the so maybe in your verse.
So, or therefore, have no fear of them.
Well, what's that pointing back to when it says therefore?
And the answer is this verse in the preceding one.
or these words in the preceding verse.
If they have called the master of the house beelzebel, how much more will they malign those of his own household?
Therefore have no fear of them.
You got the argument?
If they call the master of the house beelzebel, how much more will they call you beelzebel?
Therefore have no fear of them.
That's odd.
Oh, you're going to call me beelzebel?
I should fear them.
No, no, no.
If they call the master of the house Beelzebel, they're going to call you that.
Therefore, they'll be afraid of them.
What's the logic here?
The logic is you're in good company when they call you Beelzebel because they call Jesus Beelzebel.
And Jesus is God.
And he's all wise that he's all powerful.
And he said exactly what ought to be said on every occasion.
And they called him the devil.
What do you expect to happen to you?
You're in good company.
That's the argument.
You're with Jesus.
You're not above your master.
Argument number two.
In the middle of verse 26, there's a little word that the NIV drops out.
Shame on them.
And thank you, Lane Dennis, for taking the initiative to do better in the upcoming ESV.
However, Lane is Lane Dennis back.
There's a new translation coming.
Going to be the best translation out there, Lord willing.
Because the goal of the translation is to be as literal as you can be and to be as readable as you can be.
Well, that's a big challenge.
Well, the NIV is a paraphrase.
It's just leaving words out right and left.
I can't preach from the NIB.
I'd have to constantly be pulling rank on my people.
However, last Sunday, I preached from Romans 5, 1 and 2, and I'm going to tell you a little bit of that sermon if you're around in the next two days.
But in verse 2, the NASB, bless your heart, says,
Well, the verse starts, therefore having been justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now here's verse two, through whom also we have admittance into the grace, this grace in which we stand and we exalt in the hope of the glory of God.
The NIV leaves out also, the RSV leaves out also, and the ESV leaves out also.
But we're going to fix that.
Because I built my whole servant on the word also.
Here's the reason.
Without the word also, we have peace with God through whom
We have access into this grace and all the commentators who don't pay any attention to Greek and don't read the NASB, treat this grace as the peace with God.
It can't be the peace with God because of the word also.
It's another thing.
And why the NIV and the RSV and the brothers over in Cambridge working on the ESV don't put it in there.
I don't know.
So I emailed Wayne Goudeman said put the also back in Wayne because I built my sermon on it this morning.
I got to have the word Kai in the text, which is why in our pews we have this N-A-S-B, crummy as it is.
Wooden and hard to read, but it's got the words you need.
Who cares if it's smooth?
Now, that was not the point.
The point is there's a word for here goes like this.
So have no fear of them for here comes an argument.
This is incentive number two for nothing is covered that will not be revealed or hidden that will not be known.
How's that work for your courage?
It means that even though when you preach something, many, many people may not get it.
And it may not be known as true and may not stand on its own two feet out there being praised by everybody.
Oh, yes, he said a right thing.
But many people saying it's a wrong thing.
It's a false thing.
He's not telling you the truth.
There's coming a day when what was spoken in the dark will be made light.
And what was in the secret will be proclaimed on the house.
It's going to come to light.
It's going to be made known.
So even though you may not be vindicated now, you will be vindicated later.
Take heart, brothers.
Life is two seconds long, according to James chapter four.
That's how long of April lasts on a good cold day in Wheaton.
Incentive number three, verse 28, do not fear those who kill the body, but cannot
kill the soul my paraphrase of that is fear not you can only be killed which is exactly what it says and do not fear those don't fear those who can kill the body
and can't touch the soul.
Fear the one who can cast soul and body into hell.
Ah, that's mind-boggling.
That's radical.
That'll change your preaching.
That'll change your life.
That'll change your ministry.
That'll get your people to the mission field with their children in malaria-infested places.
Oh, we're a bunch of whips in America.
Can't believe how wimpy we are.
Oh, it's a closed country.
Baloney, there aren't any closed countries.
You just can't get out of them.
And there never has been a safe place for kids.
There never has been a safe place.
America is the most dangerous country in the world for teenagers.
I'd rather lose my kid at 19 to malaria than lose him to the devil at 16 or 29 or 69 any day.
Don't fear those who can kill the body brothers.
Preach like this to your to your people.
Get your people moving into some hard things.
Get your young people excited about this.
Kids are ready to lay down their lives if somebody will tell them these things.
They don't want to just
get the latest designer clothes.
They think they do.
They don't.
No, they don't.
Well, argument number three, argument number four, incentive number four, verse 30.
Even the hairs of your head are all numbered.
What's the point of that?
Don't be afraid.
The hairs of your head are all numbered.
I think what Jesus wants us to feel when he says that is to count hairs on the head, you got to get really close.
And you have to care and spend a lot of time.
Just kind of going, one, two, three.
We adopted a little girl four years ago and she's African American.
And we've learned a whole new thing about hair.
Hair's big.
And my wife devotes three hours to this hair.
because white people adopting African Americans, one of the first assessments.
I live in a very multi-cultural neighborhood.
One of the first assessments of us is, you know how to take care of this girl?
You gonna make her look stupid?
So we go to the black community and we say, teach, show us.
You know, wanna do this right here.
Three hours.
Your tiny braids.
Jesus is over us.
He's close to us.
He's near to us.
You remember that word in 2 Timothy near the end?
I think it's 4 17 where Paul says, everybody deserted me.
But the Lord stood by me and helped me to preach the gospel fully so that it might be known throughout the whole of Caesar's household.
The Lord stood by me.
I love that picture.
There's a picture on my wall I grew up with, and now it hangs in the hallway of our house.
Some of you may have it.
It's on a log.
It's painted on a log, and it's a young teenager in a boat with a big steering wheel on a boat like this, and the clouds are dark, and Jesus, bigger than life, like Tom says, is behind him with his hand on his shoulder.
Raise your hand if you've ever seen that picture a lot.
I, that hung at the foot of my bed for 18 years.
I think probably I owe that more than my preacher when I was growing up.
But what that communicated to me about the Lord stood by me.
My teenage years were hard and he was never, never far away.
You know, there's something very striking about this.
The hairs of your head are all numbered because in Luke 21,
When Jesus is describing how horrible it's going to be in the last day, he says, you will be delivered up to governors, you will be hated by all the nations for my namesake, and some of you they will kill.
And one verse later, it says, but not a hair of your head will perish.
They catch your head in a basket.
I'll catch your hand.
That what you mean?
Chop off your head, I'll catch your head.
Something like that.
Not a hair of your head will perish when they kill you.
You get a hold of that truth and you will become one free and radical, counter-cultural citizen of heaven in the Disneyland called America.
Last and said it.
Verse 31, you are of more value than many sparrows.
Verse 29, not one of them will fall to the ground without your father's will.
You mean more to God than all the birds in the world as his child.
And not one bird.
not one little sparrow tips over and falls dead to the ground without God's purpose in it.
Which means that everything that befalls you is of God for your good.
Cancer, I just laid a 20
three-year-old young man in our church into the ground a week ago.
At least that was part of it.
I didn't do it all.
And I had done the wedding for him and his wife seven weeks earlier.
And that, too, is for the good of his wife at 21 years old, and the good of his mom and dad.
In fact, I would testify.
His mother and dad started coming to our church six months before he was diagnosed with leukemia.
And they wouldn't mind me telling you this, because they testified repeatedly to it.
They said, Pastor John, we would have gone insane.
This is halfway through the treatments.
We've gone insane.
We're at naught for the sovereignty of God that we've heard proclaimed week after week.
Henry Martin, the missionary who died at age, what, 30 or 29?
If God has worked for me to do, I cannot die.
You are immortal until your work is done.
Christians ought to be the freest most risk-taking most radical people in the world Don't yield to the spirit of the age brothers take up whatever Sacrifices are necessary and whatever suffering is necessary.
We'll talk about that more later And don't be afraid of controversy be courageous
Thank you for listening to this episode of Light and Truth, where we are committed to providing God-centered preaching to help you see Christ clearly, treasure Him truly.
I'm your host, Dan Kruver.
On our next episode, Jumpiper continues our eight-part series, Living and Dying for the Glory of Christ, with a message titled, Why the Word Must Stand at the Center of Worship.
I hope you'll join us.
For more resources, visit desiringgod.org.